# About Me

My love for goats began eleven years ago when I received a set of Boer goat triplets as a 4-H project. I raised the one that survived and added two new goats creating my first goat herd. Since then, I have been breeding goats, averaging about thirty goats in my herd at a time. From the experience of raising and showing goats I learned a great deal about Boer goats, their diet, common problems and downfalls, and diseases to treat. Through this blog, I hope to pass down this knowledge to beginners in small farm production or hobby farming, so you will have an arsenal of tips and tricks to get you started in the right direction with goat farming. 

Before I begin discussion of diseases and typical problems within a herd, I would like to discuss the origins of Boer goats, what has made them popular today, and why they are so helpful. The first full-blooded Boer Goats came to America in 1993 from South Africa. This breed was desired for their gentleness, size, and weight gain which is beneficial for production operations. Since then, the American Boer Goat Association [(ABGA)](http://abga.org/) has created standards for Boer goat producers. The organization established shows across the country for goat breeders to gather and compete for the prize of champion Boer goat. The popularity of Boer goats led to small farms and hobby farms wanting to raise them for their playfulness, kind nature, ability to clear out brush and woody areas, and for their meat and milk. Goats are very profitable since they multiply quickly, usually raise two to three goat kids per season. They also love to eat brush, so they are useful to clear out the overgrown land. Boer goats can usually be raised on land that cows can't survive on. Goats are built to live on very hilly, rocky, or mountainous terrains. They also do very well on regular pasture land, which make them a very versatile animal. Many farmers like raising goats because they can provide everything that a cow does, just in smaller quantities, also meaning they take less feed and space to grow. Boer goats are like the beef cow of the goat world. They were intended for meat production, having a higher weight gain than any other breed of goat. Although there are other breeds of "meat goats," Boers are bigger, more popular, and have more meat per carcass than any other breed. These little goats matter because there is so much potential in them. They are smaller than cows, so you can have more of them in an area, they provide meat, milk, pets, companionship, profit from selling them or their products, and their complex stomachs can digest most materials that other livestock can't. That allows them to be raised anywhere, by practically anyone. Through this blog, I will provide tips, tricks, and stories of my experiences to help you explore the exciting world of goat farming. 
