# Kidding Around

If your herd is just a bit too small, and you don't want to keep buying new goats, you may look into becoming a goat breeder. Alot of things go into choosing the right Boer buck to sire your herd, and that can alot of fun. You get to look at so many different goats and choose what traits you want in your herd. After the selection process, you bring home that prize buck for all your does. But once your does is bred, what do you do? Let nature take it's course? While it is good to let nature sort things out, a good manager will have some knowledge about kidding to help the doe bring her kid into the world. To avoid confusion in this post, a female goat is called a doe, her giving birth is called kidding, and her babies are called kids. 

The firt important note is that a Boer goat's gestation period (the length of time it takes for the doe to make a baby) is right at five months. Knowing when the doe got pregnant is important so you will know when to administer certain vitamins and minerals to the goat's diet and when to prepare a stall for the expectant mother. When the doe is close to kidding, about a month away, you should bring her closer to the barn or the place prepared for her. This is expecially important if you have very large fields for the goats. This way the goat is closer to shelter and closer to you so you can watch for signs of kidding. Right about a month away from kidding the doe's udder wil start to swell and get bigger. at this point you can start giving her rounds of vitamins and minerals. Some oral drenches (liquid medicines given by mouth) I like to use are a calcium drench to prevent milk fever, Keto-Nia to help with ketosis, and Nutri-drench which is like a energy boosting multi-vitamin. These three are good to give before adn after kidding to give a boost to both the doe and her kids. 

# Labor Day

When a doe is getting ready to go into labor, you will see some of the following signs: separation from the herd or finding a spot alone, restlessness, a very swollen udder, alot of movement in her stomach from the kids, moaning, grunting, a contant need to lick everything, and a red, swollen, puffy, protruding vulva. When the doe is beginning to go into labor, you will most likely see a think strand of mucus hanging from her vulva. If there is a lot of watery stuff with the mucus, it is probably the doe's mucus plug which is like a barrier in her uterus. This means she is dialating and the kids are on their way. At this point the doe needs to be locked up in a stall by herself with fresh water and a heat lamp if it is cool outside, or a light if it is summer. you should start to see contraction every once in a while. This will look like the doe straining, maybe tilting her head backwards, then standing up quickly and moving. Or she may begin to get up, be standing on her front legs, then lay back down. She will do this every so often, slowly getting more frequent. The doe cqan be left alone, but t would best to check on her about every two hours, eventualy moving up to every hour. Usually, Boer goats kid very easilu on theri own, but sometimes they have trouble or one gets stuck in the birth canal. Fro this reason, it would be best that the breeder were there to help pull kids and get them walking and nursing as soon as possible. 

Make sure to keep some old towels to help clean up the kids as they arrive. If you are there when the doe has her kids, check the kids to make sure they don't have their umbilical cord wrapped around their neck. At this point, you can break open the sac they are in to allow them to breathe. If the doe is interested, let her take over and clean the kid. This will allow them to connect. If the doe is struggling with the next kid, you can clean the first one a little by pulling the sac off and helping him to stand. When the doe is done pushing, place all the kids around her and get them to nurse. It is very important that thy nurse soon because the doe has nutritious colostrum that will give her kids energy and a good immune system. It would be a good idea to give each kid a bit of Nutri-drench to give them extra energy, vitamins, and minerals. Several hours after the doe gives birth, she will drop the placenta (the bag that held the kids in the womb). You can take this out of her stall and dispose of it. Leave the doe and her new kids in their stall for a few weeks if it is cold outside so the kids can gain enough strength to keep up with their mother in the field. In summer, you can let the kids out as soon as they can walk well. Baby goats are some of the cutest baby animals in the world, and I always enjoy watching the little fluffy bundles bounding across the field as they jump and play. 
